So let's go ahead now and take
a look at the ManagedBlocker
interface.
We're going to show how the
ManagedBlocker interface can
be used to help avoid starvation
and improve performance
by allowing more
computations to take place
while some computations
are blocked
waiting for I/O or synchronizers
or other blocking conditions
to abate.
So the Java fork-join
framework was initially
designed for tasks that run to
completion without blocking.
And it's somewhat of
a common misconception
that that's all it's good for.
That's not really true.
If you read the documentation,
it sort of implies that.
But later, they added this
feature about to talk about,
which really makes it possible
to use the fork-join framework
for many different
things-- not just for run
to completion tasks, but
for blocking tasks as well.
And the way this is done is with
this ManagedBlocker mechanism.
And that's used to handle
various use cases where
more worker threads may be
needed in order to ensure
the liveness and
the responsiveness
for these blocking operations.
And as I mentioned before, it
automatically and temporarily
increases the size of the
common fork-joint pool.
You can kind of think
of this like a seasonal
at various companies, like
Amazon or Walmart when
it's the holiday season
and they hire extra workers
to deal with the overload
of customers and requests
and orders, and so on.
And then after the
season is over,
they go ahead and
let those workers go.
So it temporarily increases
the pool of workers,
much like the way in which the
ManagedBlocker interface works
here.
As I mentioned earlier,
the ForkJoinPool
will reclaim the
threads if they're not
used over periods of
times, and then also
makes it possible to reinstate
them at a later point in time
if need be.
It also attempts
to try to create
or activate threads to
ensure that the target
level of parallelism is met.
So it can use this in order to
make sure you have a control
loop, where you keep things
more or less where you
want the thread levels to be.
The actual
ManagedBlocker interface
itself is a very simple API.
In fact, it only
has two methods.
One of the methods is
called isReleasable.
And it returns true if
blocking will be unnecessary,
because perhaps we were
able to acquire a lock
or obtain a message without
having to block at all.
So that's always a good thing.
That tells us the
mechanism, no need to-- that
tells the ForkJoinPool,
no need to worry
about adding an extra thread.
I got what I needed.
I'm done.
The second method is
what gets called back
if isReleasable returns false.
And this will possibly
block the calling thread.
Again, it all depends on
what the operation is.
You might get lucky and it
might return right away.
For example, if you're
waiting for a lock,
that lock might become
unlocked the minute
you try to acquire it.
But if you're not lucky,
you may have to block.
Or if you're doing
I/O operations,
they may take a while to run.
So it'll wait, essentially,
in that case for something
to finish.
It returns true if no additional
blocking is necessary.
So if block returns
true right away,
then the system
knows, OK, we're done,
and basically can
optimize the way
in which the mechanism
works internal
to the common ForkJoinPool.
Speaking of the common
ForkJoinPool, let's take a look
and see how the Fork-Join pool
actually applies the managed
blocker in its implementation.
So if you were to take
a look at the source
code for the Fork-Join
pool, which you can obtain
from this link here,
you'll see that it
extends abstract ExecutorService
and defines this static method
called managedBlock.
And this method is used
to activate a spare thread
to ensure there's sufficient
levels of parallelism
while the calling
thread is blocked.
So you use this
mechanism when you
think you might be
blocking, and then it
keeps track of whether you
blocked or not and then
compensates accordingly.
So again, we're looking
at the actual source
code that is part of the
Fork-Join Pool class.
Here's what happens.
You can see, it goes in a loop.
And while the blocker
isReleasable is false--
in the words, well, we
haven't got what we want--
then the tryCompensate
method is called.
And this is an internal
private method.
You can't call it
yourself directly.
But the implementation of
ManagedBlock can call it.
And this method basically
says, hey, if there are not
enough threads that are running,
then create or reactivate
a spare thread in order to
compensate for the blocked
threads until they unblock.
So that kind of sets
the wheels in motion.
And then, you can see
there's a do while loop here,
which will try to
attempt to acquire
the resource without blocking,
because you could get lucky
and just get it right away.
But if you're not able
to get it right away,
then the block hook
method is called back
on the blocker parameter.
And that may block
the calling thread.
And if it does, that
of course will then
cause the fork-join
pool to kick off
another thread for the common
fork-join pool in order
for the blocking
to not interfere
with the total number of
threads that we'd like to be
using to keep the system alive.